rdm: custom fields (#64)
inveniosoftware/rfcs: rfcs/rdm-0064-custom-fields.md

- Start Date: 2022-06-13
- RFC PR: [#64](https://github.com/inveniosoftware/rfcs/pull/64)
- Authors: Zacharias Zacharodimos, Pablo Panero

# Custom fields

## Summary

InvenioRDM's record and community data models might not contain all the fields needed to fit a use case. However, they can be extended using _custom fields_. This RFC outlines their implementation details.

## Motivation

Different instances of InvenioRDM are setup to fit different use cases. These will need to enrich the base data model with domain specific fields in order to fulfil those. Thus, the need for a mechanism to add/support these custom fields in all levels of the existing data models (jsonschema, marshmallow, Elasticsearch mappings) and make them available to the user in the upload and community creation forms.

### Use Cases

**As an instance administrator...**

- I want to add a custom fields to the record's data model, and/or the community's data model.
- I want users to be able to input values for those custom fields via the upload and community creation forms.

> - I want to add custom fields for internal use only (i.e. not visible to the users, nor available in the forms).

Author: No, this use case is out of the scope for now. The plan is to address simple text fields and vocabularies [you can find this in the "limitations" section](https://github.com/inveniosoftware/rfcs/pull/64/files#diff-b55bb26730c22373d6dce4c210183238c7c3ae181484e48c9b0730d5b59f2553R61). Maybe we should be more "bold" on the fact that is risky and shouldn't be used that way?

Each field can be configured with following parameters

| Config property |  Type  |                          Description                          |
| :-------------: | :----: | :-----------------------------------------------------------: |
|      field      | string |      Should be set to one of the defined custom fields.       |
|    ui_widget    | string |                 Name of the UI widget to use.                 |
|      label      | string |              UI label to display for the field.               |
|   placeholder   | string |                  Placeholder for user input.                  |
|      icon       | string |                    Semantic UI icon name.                     |
|   description   | string | Description to be used as helptext for the new defined field. |

> Moreover, any other property configured in the fields will be used as properties to initialized the respective UI widget.

Author: changed by @zzacharo, in `props` instead of `ui_props`.

## Motivation

Different instances of InvenioRDM are setup to fit different use cases. In order to fulfil those, these instances will need to enrich the base data model with domain specific fields. Thus, the need for a mechanism to add/support these custom fields in all levels of the existing data models (jsonschema, marshmallow, Elasticsearch mappings) and make them available to the end user in the upload and community creation forms.

### Use Cases

**As an instance administrator...**

- I want to add a custom fields to the record's data model, and/or the community's data model.
- I want users to be able to input values for those custom fields via the upload and community creation forms.
- I want to add custom fields for internal use only (i.e. not visible to the users, nor available in the forms).
- I want to be able to hide some fields in some communities. While the fields might still be present in the data model, they won't be shown/available for input. Alternatively, I want to be able to configure custom fields per community.

**The following use cases apply to all the above points**, and focus on the how fields are defined and used.

> - I want to be able to define the type: primitive (string, number, date), complex (list, dictionary), and vocabularies (both generic and specific).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- I want to be able to define the type: primitive (string, number, boolean, date), complex (list, dictionary), and vocabularies (both generic and specific).
```

- I want to be able to define required fields.

**When displaying the custom fields in the forms...**

- I want to define groups for my new fields.
- I want to define in which order they will display inside those groups.
- I want to add fields to already existing groups (e.g. Basic information).
- I want to support translations (i18n) of the fields' label and description.

**When displaying the custom fields of records...**

- I want to define where and how the field will be shown in the landing/community page.
- I want to define how the values will be serialized into different formats (e.g. Dublin Core, Darwin Core, DataCite).
- I want to be able to filter my search results based on my new field.

> - I want to support translations (i18n) for the values of the custom fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- I want to support translations (i18n) for the values of the custom fields, when using vocabularies.
```

Author: I think this is more a limitation than a use case description. The way I see it is:
- The use case is _having support for translations_
- The reality is: we can only do it for vocabularies (stated in line 66 of limitations below)

> ### Fist iteration limitations

Reviewer: 👀 
```suggestion
### First iteration limitations
```

> The first iteration of custom fields will be available in InvenioRDM v10. It targets the implementation of two vertical workflows, allowing to add free text custom fields (e.g. keywords, descriptions) and also based on generic vocabularies (e.g. defining a new "experiment" vocabulary). This will enable the implementation of the mechanisms to support custom fields, and allow developers to extend support for new types of fields (e.g. dates).

Reviewer: What do you mean with "vertical" workflows? Difference with an "horizontal" one?

I would also add number and bool in the first iteration, should not be more complex than string...

Author: What I meant was more or less like horizontal vs vertical development (i.e. full layer vs E2E use cases). I will rephrase it.

As for the bool and number... While I agree it should be easy, it was not in the first plan and I'd like to first have things merged and working before committing in paper to more. @zzacharo WDYT?

Reviewer 2: Honestly, we can say primitive type or a more user-friendly work and give examples such as text, number etc... Adding a bool or number is not that difficult but I would probably vaguely say it here and then fully document the list in the documentation!

Author: Added bool and number

Therefore, it **comes with some limitation**:

- Only two field types are supported: Text and generic vocabularies. For example, resource types, or new ones of your creation that follow the `VocabularySchema`. This means, adhering to the following structure:

```yaml
id: ...
icon: ...
props: ...
description: ...
tags: ...
title: ...
```

- Fields are configured globally for all records and for all communities. Note that they do not mix, those appearing in records will not appear in communities. However, all communities will have the same fields.

> - You can hide (not display) fields in the UI. However, they will be available in the REST API. Moreover, hiding them will hide them globally (i.e. for all records or communities).

Reviewer: Can you specify if this is both for the upload/settings forms and for the details page of record/community, or only for one of them?

Author: Nice catch, they will be displayed in the generic view if given via REST API. It's kind of a "hiding by obscurity".

- There are no per-field permissions checks on these fields. They do respect the records permissions (i.e. will not show if the record is restricted).
- It is not possible to configure the fields using the UI, it will be done in the instance `invenio.cfg` file.
- Compatibility with OpenSearch has not been tested. Only Elasticsearch 7 has been tested.
- In the forms, you can add fields to new groups but not to existing ones (e.g. Basic Information).
- Translations (i18n) is only supported for labels and descriptions of all fields. Vocabularies also support translation of the values as long as those have been added when imported.

## Detailed design

> An instance administrator can add custom fields. **Updating and deleting a custom field is not possible**. This constraint is imposed to avoid data migration and potential inconsistencies.

Reviewer: > Updating and deleting a custom field is not possible
Does it mean that it is blocked and an error will be raised? Or it is a "dangerous, I know what I am doing" procedure when changing them in the config?

Author: It's blocked, an error is risen. See [Example CLI](https://github.com/inveniosoftware/invenio-rdm-records/pull/994#issuecomment-1174889444).

``` shell
$ invenio custom-fields create

# following output is in green
Creating all custom fields...

# following output is in red
An error occured while creating custom fields.
mapper [metadata.experiment] cannot be changed from type [text] to [keyword]
```

### Configuring a _custom field_

> The first step would be to define how custom fields can be added/configured. A top to bottom approach (from more to less abstracted) will be followed to explain the configuration. Taking the following use case:

Reviewer: I would use the present tense, as we are explaining the implementation.
```suggestion
The first step is to define how custom fields can be added/configured. A top to bottom approach (from more to less abstracted) will be followed to explain the configuration. Taking the following use case:
```

Author: fixed, also all other `would be` ocurrances.

_At CERN you want to add the experiment to which the record belong to, assuming experiments come from a controlled vocabulary. In addition, I want to be able to filter the record search by experiment._

> The instance administrator would add it in the `invenio.cfg` configuration file, under `RDM_RECORDS_CUSTOM_FIELDS` and `RDM_RECORDS_CUSTOM_FIELDS_UI`. The following example shows only the configuration needed to **enable the custom field** in the data model not how to display them. This second part will be explained in the [_Adding-a-custom-UI-widget_](#Add a custom UI widget) section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The instance administrator will change the configuraiton variables `RDM_RECORDS_CUSTOM_FIELDS` and `RDM_RECORDS_CUSTOM_FIELDS_UI` in the `invenio.cfg` configuration file. The following example shows only the configuration needed to **enable the custom field** in the data model, not how to display them. This second part will be explained in the [_Adding-a-custom-UI-widget_](#Add a custom UI widget) section.
```

```python
RDM_RECORDS_CUSTOM_FIELDS = {
    "experiment": VocabularyCF(
        name="experiment",
        vocabulary_id="cernexperiments",
    ),
}
```

> Note: In the above configuration and along this RFC configuration variables are prefixed with `RDM_RECORDS_`, this means that custom fields are being added to _records_. However, the same configuration variables are available in communities and will be used then adding custom fields to them. Namely, `COMMUNITIES_CUSTOM_FIELDS` and `COMMUNITIES_CUSTOM_FIELDS_UI`.

> Custom fields configuration, abstracts the data model in `<Type>CF` classes. These will be in charge or returning the Elasticsearch mapping and marshmallow schema that will be applied to the field. In the previous example `VocabularyCF`.

Author: I will do a mix of both sentences. I'd like to keep the _ In the previous example `VocabularyCF`_ to point to the previous example and show were in the config would this classes be reflected.

```python
class BaseCF(ABC):
"""Base Custom Field class."""

    def __init__(self, name):
        """Constructor."""
        super().__init__()
        self.name = name

    @property
    @abstractmethod
    def mapping(self):
        """Return the mapping."""
        pass

    @property
    @abstractmethod
    def schema(self):
        """Marshmallow schema for custom fields."""
        pass

    @property
    def ui_schema(self):
        """Marshmallow UI schema for custom fields.

        Controls how the field will be serialized in the UI when using the
        `UIJSONSerializer`. If not overriden, the default implementation will use
        the `BaseCF.schema` property.
        """
        return self.schema

class TextCF(BaseCF):
"""Text custom field."""

    @property
    def mapping(self):
        return {"type": "text"}

    @property
    def schema(self):
        return SanitizedUnicode()
```

> Note that all custom fields will be added inside the `custom` parent field, at the same level than `metadata`.

Reviewer: Did we assess all the implications (if any!) of having the `custom` outside the `metadata` field?

Author: I'm not sure. Having it inside `metadata` poses very big implementation challenges. And from the top of my mind I cannot think of any big inconvenience having it outside. However, we might want to sit down and think about it before going further along. You're right!

```json
{
   "metadata": {
        ...
    },
    "custom": {
        "experiment": ...
    }
}
```

#### Custom field type / Marshmallow / Elasticsearch chart

The following table represents the type conversion/relation between custom field type, Marshmallow fields and Elasticsearch mapping.

| Custom Field type | Marshmallow field | Elasticsearch mapping |
| :---------------: | :---------------: | :-------------------: |
|      string       | SanitizedUnicode  |         text          |
|      keyword      | SanitizedUnicode  |        keyword        |
|       date        |     DateField     |    data isoformat     |
|      integer      |      Integer      |        integer        |
|      double       |      Number       |        double         |
|       list        |       List        |   inner value type    |
|       dict        |       Dict        |        object         |

#### How is it linked to a record

> Note: in this sub section the term _record_ is treated as a generic term, namely a document. It will refer to bibliographic and community records as _records_.

> Custom vocabularies are added to the record's data model and dumped in their json blob. However, vocabularies are different since they need to be linked. Meaning, they need to be checked for existence when a record is created and dereferenced when it is read.

Author: Yes, sorry about that!

> The `Record` API stays compatible with its previous behaviour, accessing relation fields through the `record.relations.myrelationfield`. However, the previous `RelationsField` has been changed to `MultiRelationsField`, which accepts implementations of `RelationBase` or `RelationsField`. This allows all custom fields to be injected in the relations attribute.

Author: I was trying to say that is backcompat. I've rephrased it, is it better? It's a bit messy topic, I've tried to be more verbose.

> While the code looks similar to the following snippet, when accessing the attributes they would not need access the `custom` relation. The custom fields relations are injected by the `CustomFieldsRelation`. For example, accessing the previously configured `experiments` custom field would be done as `record.relations.experiments`, while `record.relations.custom` would give an attribute error.

Author: Yes, we dicussed it last week with you and forgot to add it here. Thanks!

```python
class Record:
    relations = MultiRelationsField(
        custom=CustomFieldsRelation(),
    )
```

The dereferencing part is transparent, i.e. no code needs to be altered since the API is still the same. It is carried out by the `RelationsComponent` which will dereference the relations.

### Creating a _custom field_

Once the custom fields are configured in the `invenio.cfg` file, they need to be added to the record's mapping, so their values are properly indexed in Elasticsearch. That can be done using the CLI.

**create**

You can add fields to the records and community data models using the following command. You can pass any number of configured fields.

```shell

> invenio custom-fields create [-f <fieldname>] [-f <fieldname>]

Author: Yes, in the end `invenio-cli` is mainly a wrapper for invenio commands.

```

In order to create _all_ configured values, just ignore the `-f` option. For example, on the first time an instance is set up.

```shell
invenio custom-fields create
```

> 

Reviewer: do you want to add anything that, if the type changes, an error is thrown?

Author: Hmm I avoided it since it was explained above in the limitation. Do you find it necessary? I can add it if so.

### Adding a custom UI widget

The previously mentioned `RDM_RECORDS_CUSTOM_FIELDS_UI` variable holds the information about how the custom fields will be displayed in the different UI pages.

As it was mentioned earlier, the structure of the config variable is as follows:

```python

> RDM_RECORDS_CUSTOM_FIELDS_UI = [{

Reviewer: So in the end we went for a separate config for fields definition and UI... do you prefer it like this?

Author: We found that it was the easiest and less complex. On the one hand they configure how fields are represented in the record ("data model"), while in the second they can specify how they are displayed. Also avoids mixing Python classes with Strings/translations... This could potentially allow in the future to have a common "registry" for fields that are defined for both records and communities.

    "section": _("CERN Fields"),
    "fields": [{
        "field": "experiment",  # this should be validated against the defined fields in `RDM_RECORDS_CUSTOM_FIELDS`
        "ui_widget": "MyCustomField",  # custom widget defined in the instance assets
        "label": _('CERN Experiment'),
        "placeholder": "Type an experiment...",
        "icon": "pencil",
        "description": _(
            "You should fill this field with one of the experiments e.g LHC, ATLAS etc.",
        )
    }]
}]
```

> The instance administrator is defining a list of sections, with each section defining its own fields respectively. By using these sections, they can semantically group together different fields. The order in which sections and fields are configured is respected in the UI. All the sections and fields will be appended be default in the end of the configured form i.e upload form and community profile page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The instance administrator is defining a list of sections, with each section defining its own fields respectively. By using these sections, they can semantically group together different fields. The order in which sections and fields are configured is respected in the UI. All the sections and fields will be appended in the end of the configured form i.e upload form and community profile page.
```

Each field can be configured with following parameters

| Config property |  Type  |                          Description                          |
| :-------------: | :----: | :-----------------------------------------------------------: |
|      field      | string |      Should be set to one of the defined custom fields.       |
|    ui_widget    | string |                 Name of the UI widget to use.                 |
|      label      | string |              UI label to display for the field.               |
|   placeholder   | string |                  Placeholder for user input.                  |
|      icon       | string |                    Semantic UI icon name.                     |
|   description   | string | Description to be used as helptext for the new defined field. |

Moreover, any other property configured in the fields will be used as properties to initialized the respective UI widget.

#### Adding or overriding UI wigets

> In the previous section, the `ui_widget` field was mentioned. Several of them

Author: True, changed the title and added a note.

are already available with InvenioRDM, however, in some cases it might be
desired to change their behaviour (override) or use a totally new widget.

> The webpack loading order for the custom fields is the following:

Reviewer: Maybe too technical?
```suggestion
UI Widget are discovered and imported in the following way:
```

What if we add a small sentence below explaining the technical part, e.g. Internally, the `webpack` configuration...

> 1. Try to import the widget from the RDM instance. The importer checks the cookiecutter `/assets/templates` folder. That folder is copied/symlinked when the assets are built.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Try to import the widget from the `my-site` instance, looking in the `/assets/templates` folder (that folder is copied/symlinked when the assets are built).
```

> 2. If the widget was not found, then it tries to import it from the local module's path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. If the widget is not found, then it tries to import it from the local module's path, e.g. `invenio-communities`.
```

> 3. If the component is still not found, then it raises an error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. If the widget is still not found, then it raises an error.
```

> With the above mechanism, instance administrators can add new files/UI widgets that can then be referenced in the config. For example, if a instance administrator wants to add a new UI widget called `MyCustomWidget` then they need to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the above mechanism, instance administrators can add new files/UI widgets that can then be referenced in the config. For example, if an instance administrator wants to add a new UI widget called `MyCustomWidget`, then (s)he will need to:
```

Author: Most of the occurrences were removed by using passive voice across the RFC. Both @zzacharo and I prefer `they` for the remaining occurrences (6 cases). If you have a strong opinion on `(s)he`, let's discuss it on Discord or in real life. Resolving this for now.

1. Go to `/my-site/assets/templates` folder
2. Create a new file called `MyCustomWidget.js`
3. Use a `default` export, to export the widget

```javascript

> /my-site/assets/templates/custom_fields/MyCustomWidget.js

Reviewer: The path here does not match the explanation above, there is a `custom_field` extra folder.

Author: Nice catch, missing `custom_fields/` above.

      </>
    );
  }
}
```

4. Then the instance administrator can reference that widget in the config:

```python
RDM_RECORDS_CUSTOM_FIELDS_UI = [{
    "section": _("CERN Fields"),
    "fields": [{
        ...
        "ui_widget": "MyCustomField",
        ...
    }]
}]
```

In a similar manner, instance administrators can redefine in their RDM instance an existing UI widget and override completely its behaviour. For this they would need to create a file with the same name as the component they want to override.

### Overriding how fields will be displayed in the record's / community's detail page

The custom fields will be displayed by default in a _to-be-defined_ place in the record's landing page and community's detail page. The default place will be decided to fit the up-to-date UX design of these pages. That said, every institution has their own UI design and it is already possible to override the default display by overriding the Jinja templates of these pages.

### Adding a custom field as facet in the search page

Search filtering or facetting would be configured as it was before, using the and `RDM_FACETS` variable.

```python
RDM_FACETS = {  # To add search filtering

>     "experiment": CFTermsFacet()

Reviewer: We are using `<Type>CF` above, but `CF<Type>Facet` here... is that ok?

Author: Yes, we do not "automagically" add facets. We use the existing RDM mechanism, which means using `RDM_FACETS` config var and `...Facet` classes. I do agree this could be abstracted, we can open an issue for a second iteration.

}
```

## Example

The full configuration for the example use case presented at the beggining would be:

> _At CERN you want to add the experiment to which the record belong to, assuming experiments come from a controlled vocabulary. In addition, I want to be able to filter the record search by experiment._

Reviewer: Corrected above

```python
RDM_RECORDS_CUSTOM_FIELDS = {
    "experiment": VocabularyCF(
        name="experiment",
        vocabulary_id="cernexperiments",
    ),
}

RDM_RECORDS_CUSTOM_FIELDS_UI = [{
    "section": _("CERN Fields"),
    "fields": [{
        "field": "experiment",  # this should be validated against the defined fields in `RDM_RECORDS_CUSTOM_FIELDS`
        "ui_widget": "MyCustomField",
        "label": _('CERN Experiment'),
        "placeholder": "Type an experiment...",
        "icon": "pencil",
        "description": _(
            "You should fill this field with one of the experiments e.g LHC, ATLAS etc.",
        )
    }]
}]

RDM_FACETS = {  # To add search filtering
    "experiment": CFTermsFacet()
}
```

Most of the configuration above is self describing. The first variable (`RDM_RECORDS_CUSTOM_FIELDS`) defines which fields are available in the record data model, while the second (`RDM_RECORDS_CUSTOM_FIELDS_UI`) defines which ones are displayed and how (allowing to "hide" some of them).

> Before being able to use the field, it has to be created:

Author: Added a note on the CLI and here, with slightly different wording.

```shell
invenio custom-fields create -f experiments
```

> Now, the field would be fully available in the records data model under `custom.experiments` and the users would see it in the upload form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, the field is fully available in the records data model under `custom.experiments` and the users will see it in the upload form.
```

## How we teach this

> This feature would be documented in the `customization` section of the InvenioRDM documentation. It should include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature will be documented in the `customization` section of the InvenioRDM documentation. It should include:
```

Using `object` fields introduces the search results problem mentioned above. However, the problem is that there will be results that are false positives, but there will never be a false negative (i.e. not return a record that should be a hit). In addition, this problem is already present in many places in the InvenioRDM data model (e.g. creators, contributors, funders, and any other complex list of objects).

**Conclusion**

Evaluation the consequences and taking as an example Zenodo, where most of the custom fields are simple (strings, numbers, dates), it has been decided to use `objects`. In the future, if this is proven to be a problem it should be tackled for all occurrences (creators, contributors, funders, etc.).

## Unresolved questions

...

## Resources/Timeline

This feature will be available in InvenioRDM v10, whose tentative release date is by the end of September 2022.

> TODO: Resources/People power? @lars @nicola

Reviewer: You can remove this part

- :grey_question: I want to be able to define the type: primitive (string, number, boolean, date), complex (list, dictionary), and vocabularies (both generic and specific).
- :x: I want to be able to define required fields.

**When displaying the custom fields in the forms...**

- :white_check_mark: I want to define groups for my new fields.
- :white_check_mark: I want to define in which order they will display inside those groups.
- :x: I want to add fields to already existing groups (e.g. Basic information).
- :white_check_mark: I want to support translations (i18n) of the fields' label and description.

**When displaying the custom fields of records...**

- :white_check_mark: I want to define where and how the field will be shown in the landing/community page.
- :white_check_mark: I want to define how the values will be serialized into different formats (e.g. Dublin Core, Darwin Core, DataCite).
- :white_check_mark: I want to be able to filter my search results based on my new field.
- :white_check_mark: I want to support translations (i18n) for the values of the custom fields, when using vocabularies.

### First iteration limitations

> The first iteration of custom fields will be available in InvenioRDM v10. It targets the implementation of two field types, allowing to add primitive types custom fields (e.g. free text, boolean, number) and also based on generic vocabularies (e.g. defining a new "experiment" vocabulary). This will enable the implementation of the mechanisms to support custom fields, and allow developers to extend support for new types of fields (e.g. dates).

Author: @zzacharo rephrased as we discussed this morning. Into "future work" to not focus on "when" or a specific version. However, I have the gut feeling that now is not as clear as before. WDYT? cc @lnielsen

- :white_check_mark: I want to support translations (i18n) of the fields' label and description.

**When displaying the custom fields of records...**

- :white_check_mark: I want to define where and how the field will be shown in the landing/community page.
- :white_check_mark: I want to define how the values will be serialized into different formats (e.g. Dublin Core, Darwin Core, DataCite).
- :white_check_mark: I want to be able to filter my search results based on my new field.
- :white_check_mark: I want to support translations (i18n) for the values of the custom fields, when using vocabularies.

### First iteration limitations

The first iteration of custom fields will be available in InvenioRDM v10. It targets the implementation of two field types, allowing to add primitive types custom fields (e.g. free text, boolean, number) and also based on generic vocabularies (e.g. defining a new "experiment" vocabulary). This will enable the implementation of the mechanisms to support custom fields, and allow developers to extend support for new types of fields (e.g. dates).

Therefore, it **comes with some limitation**:

> - Only two field types are supported: Text and generic vocabularies. For example, resource types, or new ones of your creation that follow the `VocabularySchema`. This means, adhering to the following structure:

Author: I think the data model is not very well explained in the docs. But yes, good point! Thanks

## Detailed design

An instance administrator can add custom fields. **Updating and deleting a custom field is not possible**. This constraint is imposed to avoid data migration and potential inconsistencies.

### Configuring a _custom field_

The first step is to define how custom fields can be added/configured. A top to bottom approach (from more to less abstracted) will be followed to explain the configuration. Taking the following use case:

_At CERN, I want to choose the experiment to which the record belong to, assuming experiments come from a controlled vocabulary. In addition, I want to be able to filter the record search by experiment._

The instance administrator will change the configuraiton variables `RDM_RECORDS_CUSTOM_FIELDS` and `RDM_RECORDS_CUSTOM_FIELDS_UI` in the `invenio.cfg` configuration file. The following example shows only the configuration needed to **enable the custom field** in the data model not how to display them. This second part will be explained in the [_Adding-a-custom-UI-widget_](#Add a custom UI widget) section.

```python
RDM_RECORDS_CUSTOM_FIELDS = {
    "experiment": VocabularyCF(
        name="experiment",

>         vocabulary_id="cernexperiments",

Author: A whole section has been added in unresolved questions and more details can be found along the RFC regarding namespacing.

    ),
}
```

> > Note: In the above configuration and along this RFC configuration variables are prefixed with `RDM_RECORDS_`, this means that custom fields are being added to _records_. However, the same configuration variables are available in communities and will be used then adding custom fields to them. Namely, `COMMUNITIES_CUSTOM_FIELDS` and `COMMUNITIES_CUSTOM_FIELDS_UI`.

Author: Agree on this point. There is an issue to investigate if there is a better way than exposing this "cumbersome" double config (e.g. records and communities). What about `RECORDS_CUSTOM_FIELDS` and `COMMUNITIES_CUSTOM_FIELDS`? It would clash with `invenio-records`? I'm mainly not convinced of giving the full `RDM_` prefix to something that is just records, since communities is also part of "RDM". Facets in the end is a generic, although it might be the same when/if configuring communities search facets. Will change it for now, then maybe there is another way found when tcakling the specific issue.

> > Note: In the above configuration and along this RFC configuration variables are prefixed with `RDM_RECORDS_`, this means that custom fields are being added to _records_. However, the same configuration variables are available in communities and will be used then adding custom fields to them. Namely, `COMMUNITIES_CUSTOM_FIELDS` and `COMMUNITIES_CUSTOM_FIELDS_UI`.

Author: https://github.com/inveniosoftware/invenio-rdm-records/issues/1006

```python
class BaseCF(ABC):
"""Base Custom Field class."""

    def __init__(self, name):
        """Constructor."""
        super().__init__()
        self.name = name

    @property
    @abstractmethod
    def mapping(self):
        """Return the mapping."""
        pass

    @property
    @abstractmethod
    def schema(self):
        """Marshmallow schema for custom fields."""
        pass

    @property
    def ui_schema(self):
        """Marshmallow UI schema for custom fields.

        Controls how the field will be serialized in the UI when using the
        `UIJSONSerializer`. If not overriden, the default implementation will use
        the `BaseCF.schema` property.
        """
        return self.schema

class TextCF(BaseCF):
"""Text custom field."""

    @property
    def mapping(self):
        return {"type": "text"}

    @property
    def schema(self):
        return SanitizedUnicode()
```

Note that all custom fields will be added inside the `custom` parent field, at the same level than `metadata`.

```json
{
   "metadata": {
        ...
    },

>     "custom_fields": {

Reviewer 3: We long time ago discussed e.g. ``ext``

Author: I'm not sure I follow this question, is it about the naming of the field? We went for `custom_fields` because it seemed a bit weird to add `ext`, which came from "metadata _ext_ensions". The `ext` field has been removed from the records schema/mapping.

Author: Discussed on Discord. I guess we need to agree on a name.

>         "experiment": ...

Reviewer 3: This should deal with namespacing as well:

```
"ext": {
    "dwc:kingdom": "....",
    "cern:experiment": "...."
}
```

Author: Namespacing would be dealt with complex objects, let's say "unresolved question" since complex objects are not supported right now. This would be something like:

```
"custom_fields": {
    "dwc": {
        "kingdom": "....",
    ",
    "cern": {
        "experiment": "....",
    }
}
```

I understand is not the previous implementation, but this way is more clear and compatible with the CF classes defined on the RFC. Do you see any drawbacks?

     metadata = ...
     custom_fields = fields.Nested(CustomFieldsSchema)
```

It will load from configuration all custom fields an generate a Marshmallow schema. The resulting schema will have as fields the values returned by the `<Type>CF.schema` function. For example `SanitizedUnicode` in the `TextCF` presented above.

```python
class CustomFieldsSchema(Schema):
     """Marshmallow schema for custom fields.

     Loads all schemas from the configured fields.
     Uses the singleton pattern to avoid loading multiple times.
     """

     def __init__(self, *args, **kwargs):
         """constructor."""
         super().__init__(*args, **kwargs)
         config = current_app.config.get("RDM_RECORDS_CUSTOM_FIELDS", {})
         self.fields = {
             field_key: getattr(field, "schema")()
             for field_key, field in config.items()
         }
         self._schema = Schema.from_dict(self.fields)()

     def _serialize(self, obj, **kwargs):
         """Dumps the custom fields values."""
         return self._schema.dump(obj)

     def _deserialize(self, data, **kwargs):
         """Loads the custom fields values."""
         return self._schema.load(data=data)
```

> #### Linking vocabulary custom fields to a record

Reviewer 3: Managed to read until here

```python
class BaseCF(ABC):
"""Base Custom Field class."""

    def __init__(self, name):
        """Constructor."""
        super().__init__()
        self.name = name

    @property
    @abstractmethod
    def mapping(self):
        """Return the mapping."""
        pass

    @property
    @abstractmethod
    def schema(self):
        """Marshmallow schema for custom fields."""
        pass

    @property
    def ui_schema(self):
        """Marshmallow UI schema for custom fields.

        Controls how the field will be serialized in the UI when using the
        `UIJSONSerializer`. If not overriden, the default implementation will use
        the `BaseCF.schema` property.
        """
        return self.schema

class TextCF(BaseCF):
"""Text custom field."""

    @property
    def mapping(self):
        return {"type": "text"}

    @property
    def schema(self):
        return SanitizedUnicode()
```

Note that all custom fields will be added inside the `custom` parent field, at the same level than `metadata`.

```json
{
   "metadata": {
        ...
    },

>     "custom": {

Reviewer: what about:
```suggestion
    "custom-fields": {
```

Moreover, any other property can be passed in the respective UI widget via the `props` key.

#### Adding custom fields to the forms

> This section focuses on adding/overriding widgets for the records upload or communities settings form. How to display them on existing records is explained in the following section.

In the previous section, the `ui_widget` field was mentioned. Several of them
are already available with InvenioRDM, however, in some cases it might be
desired to change their behaviour (override) or use a totally new widget.

UI Widget are discovered and imported in the following way:

1. Try to import the widget from the `my-site` instance, looking in the `/assets/templates` folder (that folder is copied/symlinked when the assets are built).
2. If the widget is not found, then it tries to import it from the local module's path, e.g. `invenio-communities`.
3. If the widget is still not found, then it raises an error.

With the above mechanism, instance administrators can add new files/UI widgets that can then be referenced in the config. For example, if an instance administrator wants to add a new UI widget called `MyCustomWidget`, then they need to:

> 1. Go to `/path/to/my-site/assets/templates/custom_fields/` folder

Reviewer: For the code, do we use `dash` or `underscore`?
```suggestion
1. Go to `/path/to/my-site/assets/templates/custom-fields/` folder
```

Reviewer 2: It's a dash!

- :white_check_mark: I want to be able to filter my search results based on my new field.
- :white_check_mark: I want to support translations (i18n) for the values of the custom fields, when using vocabularies.

### Future work

This RFC targets the implementation of two field types, allowing to add primitive types custom fields (e.g. free text, boolean, number) and also based on generic vocabularies (e.g. defining a new "experiment" vocabulary). This will enable the implementation of the mechanisms to support custom fields, and allow developers to impelement new types of fields (e.g. dates).

Functionalities that might come in the future:

- Configuration of custom fields per community. Meaning, each community has its own specific custom fields.
- Internal use field, that will not be visible by end users in the UI nor in the REST API.
- Applying permissions per-field.
- Configuring custom fields using the UI, for example the _Backoffice_.
- Compatibility with OpenSearch.
- Add custom fields to existing sections, for example _Basic Information_.

## Detailed design

> An instance administrator can add custom fields. **Updating and deleting a custom field is not possible**. This constraint is imposed to avoid data migration and potential inconsistencies.

Author: Thanks, this was very insightful. I've restructured the RFC and created some extra sections.

> An instance administrator can add custom fields. **Updating and deleting a custom field is not possible**. This constraint is imposed to avoid data migration and potential inconsistencies.

Author: > it helps to put a diagram and and overview

What type of diagram do you have in mind? or was it the "index"/"table of contents"?

> An instance administrator can add custom fields. **Updating and deleting a custom field is not possible**. This constraint is imposed to avoid data migration and potential inconsistencies.

Author: Discussion: diagram -> getting overall picture, could be text, diagram with layers architecture or similar.

> ### Configuring a _custom field_

Author: Thanks! "fixed". I've re-arranged topics along with the index mentioned below.

        self.name = name

    @property
    @abstractmethod
    def mapping(self):
        """Return the mapping."""
        pass

    @property
    @abstractmethod
    def schema(self):
        """Marshmallow schema for custom fields."""
        pass

    @property
    def ui_schema(self):
        """Marshmallow UI schema for custom fields.

        Controls how the field will be serialized in the UI when using the
        `UIJSONSerializer`. If not overriden, the default implementation will use
        the `BaseCF.schema` property.
        """
        return self.schema

class TextCF(BaseCF):
"""Text custom field."""

    @property
    def mapping(self):
        return {"type": "text"}

    @property
    def schema(self):
        return SanitizedUnicode()
```

Note that all custom fields will be added inside the `custom` parent field, at the same level than `metadata`.

```json
{
   "metadata": {
        ...
    },
    "custom_fields": {
        "experiment": ...
    }
}
```

#### Custom field type / Marshmallow / Elasticsearch chart

The following table represents the type conversion/relation between custom field type, Marshmallow fields and Elasticsearch mapping.

> | Custom Field type | Marshmallow field | Elasticsearch mapping |

Reviewer 3: Minor: What about the JSONSchema? If we decide not to do structural validation, it's ok, but the RFC should explain why we don't.

Author: Discussion: add why not

| :---------------: | :---------------: | :-------------------: |
|      string       | SanitizedUnicode  |         text          |
|      keyword      | SanitizedUnicode  |        keyword        |
|       date        |     DateField     |    isoformat date     |
|     date range    |   EDTFDateString  |  multi isoformat date |
|      integer      |      Integer      |        integer        |
|      double       |      Number       |        double         |
|      boolean      |      Boolean      |        boolean        |
|       list        |       List        |   inner value type    |
|       dict        |       Dict        |        object         |

Note the date range is handled as other date ranges using the elasticsearch dumper (`EDTFListDumperExt`) to extract the gte (lower) and lte (upper) date limits.

> #### Data validation

Reviewer 3: Minor: How do I provide a custom validation function? E.g. I want my integer to be a number between 0 and 100.

Author: Discussion: OK, add

Author: Can you customize/override error messages?

`CustomFieldsRelation` is an implementation of `RelationsField` that injects vocabulary custom fields in the record's relations attribute. In addition, to avoid name collisions these new fields are prefixed with `custom_`.

For example, the previously configured `experiments` custom field is accessed as `record.relations.custom_experiments`, while `record.relations.custom` would give an attribute error.

```python
class Record:
    relations = MultiRelationsField(
        custom_fields=CustomFieldsRelation(),
    )
```

The dereferencing part is transparent, i.e. no code needs to be altered since the API is still the same. It is carried out by the `RelationsComponent` which will dereference the relations.

### Creating a _custom field_

Once the custom fields are configured in the `invenio.cfg` file, they need to be added to the record's mapping, so their values are properly indexed in Elasticsearch. That can be done using the CLI.

**create**

You can add fields to the records and community data models using the following command. You can pass any number of configured fields.

```shell

> invenio-cli custom-fields create [-f <fieldname>] [-f <fieldname>]

Reviewer 3: Question: Can this not be part of the ``index init``? I.e. if I configure the custom fields in ``invenio.cfg`` before creating the index, then it should just be there from the beginning and not having to run this command. 

Comment: Specify here that the problem being solved, is to update the mapping once it has already been created (i.e. you add a custom field after running the instance)

Author: Discussion:
- open issue
- two use cases:
    - `invenio-cli services setup` for new instances
    - `invenio-cli upgrade` since it could be considered a migration - schema upgrade

Author: https://github.com/inveniosoftware/invenio-rdm-records/issues/1007

        "ui_widget": "MyCustomField",
        "props": {
            "label": _('CERN Experiment'),
            "placeholder": "Type an experiment...",
            "icon": "pencil",
            "description": _(
                "You should fill this field with one of the experiments e.g LHC, ATLAS etc.",
            )
        },
    }]
}]

RDM_FACETS = {  # To add search filtering
    "experiment": CFTermsFacet()
}
```

Most of the configuration above is self describing. The first variable (`RDM_CUSTOM_FIELDS`) defines which fields are available in the record data model, while the second (`RDM_CUSTOM_FIELDS_UI`) defines which ones are displayed and how (allowing to "hide" some of them).

Before being able to use the field, it has to be created. This command only needs to be run in the first time before its usage.

```shell
invenio-cli custom-fields create -f experiments
```

Now, the field is fully available in the records data model under `custom_fields.experiments` and the users will see it in the upload form.

## How we teach this

This feature will be documented in the `customization` section of the InvenioRDM documentation. It should include:

> - How to configure the custom fields in the `invenio.cfg` file.

Reviewer 3: Question: What would the Table of Contents look like ?

Author: Hmmm, I think it would be very similar to the actual points/enummeration of this section. Although not all fit there (e.g. CLI part should be briefly talked about in the docs and the point to the "reference guide".

Author: discussion: ok

- Provides flexibility in what a system admin can configure e.g use programmatic API.

**Conclusion**

Configuration will be done in cfg/python files as is the pattern in Invenio. However, the advantages of DB configuration have been noted and a wider task to implement it might be carried out in the future.

### Nested vs Object as Elasticsearch mapping

The question is about storing the custom fields as `object` or `nested`. The difference between them is the search behaviour and performance on objects with lists. Imagine there is the need to add an object `measures` which contain `width` and `heigth`. In the mapping it is represented as follows:

```json
{
  "measures": [
    {
      "heigth": 100,
      "width": 100
    },
    {
      "heigth": 50,
      "width": 50
    }
  ]
}
```

Using `nested` field each measure is stored separately. However, `object` would flatten the values to:

```
{
    "measures.heigth": [100, 50],
    "measures.width": [100, 50]
}
```

As a consequence, querying for "height=100 AND width=50" would produce a match, when in reality there is no measure that matches it.

**Consequences**

> While using `nested` fields improves the quality of search, it can have a big impact in performance. Some cases where queries slow down from 5ms to 240ms [have been reported](https://discuss.elastic.co/t/performance-on-query-with-nested-objects/181792). Moreover, the current query parser does not support nested queries. While code can be ported from Zenodo, it will have added costs in people resources.

Reviewer 3: Question: Do custom fields on Zenodo use nested? If so, do we know if there's a requirement from Plazi to do specific searches?

Author: In Zenodo they are nested, but during the initial discussions, it was deemed unnecessary.

After discussions with @slint: There is no requirement from Plazi.

Using `object` fields introduces the search results problem mentioned above. However, the problem is that there will be results that are false positives, but there will never be a false negative (i.e. not return a record that should be a hit). In addition, this problem is already present in many places in the InvenioRDM data model (e.g. creators, contributors, funders, and any other complex list of objects).

**Conclusion**

Evaluation the consequences and taking as an example Zenodo, where most of the custom fields are simple (strings, numbers, dates), it has been decided to use `objects`. In the future, if this is proven to be a problem it should be tackled for all occurrences (creators, contributors, funders, etc.).

## Unresolved questions

> Per community fields (both data model and settings form), required fields, and more flexible UI customizations might be implemented in the future. However, a clear path to implementation could not be identified due to their complexity.

Reviewer 3: Question: Why is required fields not supported? Is that just data validation on the marshmallow schema?

> Per community fields (both data model and settings form), required fields, and more flexible UI customizations might be implemented in the future. However, a clear path to implementation could not be identified due to their complexity.

Author: > Question: will we be able to add custom fields to communities or only records?

It is untested, but the way we have coded in the POC does not point to any problems adding them to communities (globally, not per community). So I'd say "yes".

> Why is required fields not supported? Is that just data validation on the marshmallow schema?

Technically yes, should simple to add it as an attribute in the `BaseCF` class. But it's not in the POC and I'm not 100% sure about it. Hence, unresolved question.

> Per community fields (both data model and settings form), required fields, and more flexible UI customizations might be implemented in the future. However, a clear path to implementation could not be identified due to their complexity.

Author: Discussion: required OK, displayed at the bottom not in the basic - top - info (limitation)

> ### Vocabularies namespacing

Author: NAMESPACES= {
    dwc: https://dwc.com
}

VocabularyCF(namespace=dwc, name=taxonomy)

{
  custom_fields: {
    "dwc:taxonomy"
  }
}

- :white_check_mark: I want to be able to filter my search results based on my new field.
- :white_check_mark: I want to support translations (i18n) for the values of the custom fields, when using vocabularies.

### Future work

This RFC targets the implementation of two field types, allowing to add primitive types custom fields (e.g. free text, boolean, number) and also based on generic vocabularies (e.g. defining a new "experiment" vocabulary). This will enable the implementation of the mechanisms to support custom fields, and allow developers to impelement new types of fields (e.g. dates).

Functionalities that might come in the future:

- Configuration of custom fields per community. Meaning, each community has its own specific custom fields.
- Internal use field, that will not be visible by end users in the UI nor in the REST API.
- Applying permissions per-field.
- Configuring custom fields using the UI, for example the _Backoffice_.
- Compatibility with OpenSearch.
- Add custom fields to existing sections, for example _Basic Information_.

## Detailed design

> 

Author: optional: add challenges, referencing to the general architecture (resource, service, data layer)?

- [Building new custom widgets.](#building-new-custom-widgets)

Along the RFC the following example use case will be used to exaplain the corresponding topic:

_At CERN, I want to choose the experiment to which the record belong to, assuming experiments come from a controlled vocabulary. In addition, I want to be able to filter the record search by experiment._

### Defining custom fields for an instance.

The first step to add custom fields is to define/configure them. The instance administrator will change the configuraiton variables `RDM_CUSTOM_FIELDS` and `RDM_CUSTOM_FIELDS_UI` in the `invenio.cfg` configuration file. The following example shows only the configuration needed to **enable the custom field** in the data model not how to display them. This second part will be explained in the [Rendering widgets for custom fields in a form.](#rendering-widgets-for-custom-fields-in-a-form) section.

```python
RDM_CUSTOM_FIELDS = {
    "experiment": VocabularyCF(
        name="experiment",
        vocabulary_id="cernexperiments",  # see namespacing in the unresolved questions section
    ),
}
```

> > Note: In the above configuration and along this RFC configuration variables are prefixed with `RDM_`, this means that custom fields are being added to _records_. However, the same configuration variables are available in communities and will be used then adding custom fields to them. Namely, `COMMUNITIES_CUSTOM_FIELDS` and `COMMUNITIES_CUSTOM_FIELDS_UI`.

Author: move this to the beginning of the section

> 

Author: add namespacing here

Along the RFC the following example use case will be used to exaplain the corresponding topic:

_At CERN, I want to choose the experiment to which the record belong to, assuming experiments come from a controlled vocabulary. In addition, I want to be able to filter the record search by experiment._

> Note: Along this RFC configuration variables are prefixed with `RDM_`, this means that custom fields are being added to _records_. However, the same configuration variables will be available in communities and will be used then adding custom fields to them. Namely, `COMMUNITIES_CUSTOM_FIELDS` and `COMMUNITIES_CUSTOM_FIELDS_UI`.

### Defining custom fields for an instance

The first step to add custom fields is to define/configure them. The instance administrator will change the configuraiton variables `RDM_CUSTOM_FIELDS` and `RDM_CUSTOM_FIELDS_UI` in the `invenio.cfg` configuration file. The following example shows only the configuration needed to **enable the custom field** in the data model not how to display them. This second part will be explained in the [Rendering widgets for custom fields in a form](#rendering-widgets-for-custom-fields-in-a-form) section.

```python

> NAMESPACES = {

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
RDM_CUSTOM_FIELDS_NAMESPACES = {
```

I guess to keep the naming consistent/related.

    "cern": "https://cern.ch/terms",
    "dwc": "http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/"
}

RDM_CUSTOM_FIELDS = {
    "experiment": VocabularyCF(
        vocabulary_id="cernexperiments",  # see namespacing in the unresolved questions section
        name="experiment",
        namespace="cern", # or other, for example, dwc for Darwin Core
        required=True,
        validation=custom_validate_func(),
        error_messages={"required": "custom message"},
    ),
}
```

The last three attributes, namely `required`, `validation_func` and `error_messages`, are passed to the Marshmallow field. This allows the instance administrator to configure custom behaviour, both in validation and error messages returned.

> **Namespacing**

Author: This section could use some love. But I'm not so familiar with Zenodo's implementation. Anything you see missing @slint?

Reviewer 4: I think the namespacing also affects the `RDM_CUSTOM_FIELDS` key uniqueness. E.g. if we had `cern:collectionID` and `dwc:collectionID`, what would be the keys in `RDM_CUSTOM_FIELDS`? Possible solutions:

- the keys would be `cern_collectionID`,  `dwc_collectionID` (not sure about the casing here, but again it's up to each instance probably)

         }
         self._schema = Schema.from_dict(self.fields)()

     def _serialize(self, obj, **kwargs):
         """Dumps the custom fields values."""
         return self._schema.dump(obj)

     def _deserialize(self, data, **kwargs):
         """Loads the custom fields values."""
         return self._schema.load(data=data)
```

### Linking custom fields to vocabularies

> Note: in this sub section the term _record_ is treated as a generic term, namely a document. It will refer to bibliographic and community records as _records_.

Simple custom fields types are added to the record's data model and dumped in its json blob. However, the vocabulary type works differently as it is a relation to another record, and it needs to be linked. Meaning, the selected value need to be checked for existence when a record is created and dereferenced when it is read.

The programmatic API to access records' relations is kept intact. For example, a field named `myrelationfield` would be accessed as `record.relations.myrelationfield`. However, a new class `MultiRelationsField` has been implemented to accept not only implementations of `RelationBase` but also `RelationsField`.

> `CustomFieldsRelation` is an implementation of `RelationsField` that injects vocabulary custom fields in the record's relations attribute. In addition, to avoid name collisions these new fields are prefixed with `custom_`.

Author: This section has two issues now:

- The prefix should be `custom_fields_`
- What about namespaces?

I fear we might end up with fields like `relations.custom_fields_cern_experiment`, which is very long and not dev frienly. However, this is **only a problem in the programmatic API**, which being honest we do not use so ofter for relations... Also, I think it is **not a blocker**, and can be figured out later on. cc @zzacharo @lnielsen

Reviewer 2: I would probably prepend the namespace, so users will know what to expect if they define long namespaces. For example, you would access it as `record.relations.cern_experiment`...
